Title: Entering MIFOS 2
Date: 2013-10-07 
Category: i290m-ocpp
Tags: assignment2, mifos, opensource
slug: A1-StefanTian
Author: Stefan
Summary: Second Assignment

The mission of MIFOS is to unlock the potential of microfinance in order to expedite the trek out of poverty for users globally. Here in America, we take for granted the fact that we have relative ease in accessing loans. We don’t realize how much a loan can quicken the process to set up a business and lift an individual up on their feet. To put it in perspective, I can’t imagine how long it would take most of us to purchase a home without the help of loans. My family’s mortgage hasn’t been paid off yet after 7 years so effectively, we still wouldn’t be able to own a home by now. 
However, financial institutions dislike extending smaller loan amounts because the amount of servicing and maintenance required is not worth the return. This is where MIFOS steps in. MIFOS is a free open source financial software that is given out to financial institutions worldwide in order to induce and encourage easier and increased amounts of loans. MIFOS is open source because it’s mission statement is to help alleviate poverty globally and this can be done the fastest by making its technology openly accessible to users and Microfinance institutions everywhere. In order to do this, not only does the technology have to be accessible but also has to have the ability to be modified for specific uses and enhanced to support different languages. The easiest and most innovative way to ensure that this could be done was through open source. Not only is the technology open source, but the globally networked support staff of volunteers and experts alike are ready to help answer any questions in almost any language. The Open source factor makes tackling a global epidemic a much easier and diversified task. 

The User community involves around 50 different Microfinance Institutions situated in the third world and countless specialists to assist the process. Officially, MIFOS does not specify how many volunteers it is currently hosting. I posted to the mailing list asking if anyone knew of how many contributors MIFOS currently had but no one really responded. This is something that I’ve noticed about the MIFOS community. Scrolling down, I saw two different posts that just said hi and introduced themselves to the community but literally got no response. I think because MIFOS volunteers are segregated and separated into teams immediately upon joining, there’s not much community cohesion and more team based guidance under a supervisor.  This has its benefits and down sides and I guess this could be interpreted as one of the down sides. However, after the surveying the team count for the majority of tasks currently assigned, there are around 90 or so volunteers from what I can tell listed on the website. 

The MIFOS product is essentially a platform for micro-finance transactions to be completed through. Its key features  is that its low cost, user friendly, and works on low connectivity with global support. The platform can be downloaded independently off of the MIFOS website or any institution can contact a specialist through the website to help guide them through the process. 

As I have stated before, my technical background in coding is not incredibly strong, and the interactions that I’ve had with the MIFOS platform have been limited. My contributions so far have only included documentation and working on transitioning from the old MIFOS program to the very newly executed MIFOS X. 
