Title: Exploring Common Crawl
Date: 2013-12-16 10:20
Category: Open Collaboration and Peer Production
Tags: pelican, publishing
Slug: commoncrawl
Author: Renu Bora
Summary: Assignment 4

ASSIGNMENT 4: How does your community make tough decisions? What is it's governance model--for example, is it a benevolent dictatorship, or consensus driven? How did it get to be that way? Do you think this governance model is conducive to cooperation on your project? Are there hidden power dynamics in your project that influence decision-making but are not explicitly part of the governance model? Think critically about the social organization of your project: could you improve on it? Where possible, link to your community's policy documents and examples of community behavior.
Common Crawl is unusual in that it focuses on making its corpus of web crawl data available to any number of people and communities. In theory, its product community could be strictly internal with only official staff (Which could include some volunteers. It’s “customers” or “users” could be dispersed individuals with no form of community in themselves). However, the mission is to further innovation across research, business, and education via the open access to information on the web. The agenda of open access supports communities indirectly in that best practices increasingly involve collaboration and community ( As per Annaleee Saxenian’s well-known argument from “Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128,” these distributed structures are largely responsible for why Silicone Valley innovation leads the US, in combination with California’s anti-compete laws that allowed workers to circulate amongst companies). The various “open” movements of software, government, data, and more tend to overlap in culture and people that believe in the value of “public domain” or “commons” to both public and private interests.
That said, there are contributors of code and content to Common Crawl’s social media sites. Common Crawl staff will occasionally answer a question, and some contributors become endorsed or promoted via Common Crawl’s  sites. However, some communities are unofficial or nascent in that it is up to them to self-organize via conversations that may lead to collaboration at some later date. There is not much data available (or at least, published) that documents such collaborations, so one strategy of Common Crawl could involve tracking and utilizing such community activity. The users of Common Crawl, some of whom are academic, do have their own communities which may engage with their Common Crawl research. One example is the Web Data Commons group, that University affiliation and funding support that includes an Amazon.com funding grant: http://webdatacommons.org/. 
The governance is quite clearly a benevolent dictatorship, in that the foundation produces the product (as well as the communications infrastructure). As 501c3 non-profit foundation, it has a board of directors, advisory board, and a staff with a president and leaders. Presumably, the President Lisa Green maintains final decision-making powers. The internal decision-making processes and discussions amongst the board and staff is not made visible or public. However, they do make announcements about their decisions and reasoning (as per their annual crawl publication, with 2013 marking substantial changes). Also, Lisa Green was available to me by phone for on-the-record discussion about the governance and decision-making, some of which informs this report.
	Their Google groups forum statements resembles not a governance policy, but a community policy, in that it at least describes the intent of the forum resource they are providing. As mentioned earlier:
“This group is intended to enable discussions and encourage collaboration between the community of coders, hackers, data scientists, developers and organizations interested in working with open web crawl data. 
This group is a place to:
*Discuss challenges
*Share ideas for projects and products
*Look for collaborators and partners
*Offer advice and share methods
*Ask questions and get advice from others
*Show off cool stuff you build
*Keep up to date on the latest news from Common Crawl”

As for influences, Gil Elbaz is the founder and Chairman of the Board. I do think that the structure of Common Crawl has some organizational stability, and some product and community flux. I think they don’t yet know specifically what types of innovations will emerge to fulfill their mission (research, education, and industry). Because of that, they leave certain directives and guidelines up to the community (given the Terms of Use). What might help explore the market opportunities (both public good and profit) would be to flesh out some genres of innovation and possibility that might emerge from the corpus. That might just mean collecting more information about the successes and failures of their users (as well as trying to learn better who they are). They have told me they intend to have improved “Getting Started” or onboarding documentation (which I would like to help with). It’s possible some of that material could include experimental/ideation uses, possibly in alignment with interdisciplinary data science efforts across universities and industries. I do think multi-modal or integrative data approaches are still being formed—combining different types of unstructured and structured data sources (integrating them at least for analysis). Their corpus is so large it’s hard to imagine a simple integration, but having them intersect with research communities and other corpuses might yield interesting educational and innovation resources (just having more concrete, disciplinary, or domain-specific ideas and information about the corpus. Possibly even links to research resources intersecting with their academic and industry fields). A counterpoint to that idea might be that their focus and mission is not to delve into specific uses and methodologies, but just provide a resource. Where that becomes challenging is where one treats this resource as a product with users, markets, and market spaces which are both hard to map and in flux. Marketing activity may yield some surprising users or needs. 

[webdatacommons]: http://webdatacommons.org/